I'm gonna be completely honest with you
here it's important I hope it's a
subject matter of glucose was boring
until I read your book and then I was
like oh my God
Jesse introspect the glucose goddess is
a biochemist an author teaching us the
best hacks to eat right without giving
up the foods that we love glucose is
your body's favorite source of energy
your brain cells are using glucose to
think speak move so when you flood your
body with too much glucose too quickly
what happens is what I call a glucose
Spike the more spikes you have the
faster you die
in your book you talk about these 10
hacks yeah eat food in the right order
yeah after you eat move drink vinegar
before you eat yeah you're such a weirdo
learn the glucose hacks and then just
eat everything you love like that's the
thing you have to understand why do you
care about this stuff well I went
through my own sort of Health Journey it
was
awful and I was like I need to figure
out how to fix myself like I need to
understand what's going on because
otherwise I just don't want to live
anymore it was really to that point I
was like either I figure out how to fix
this or this is just too painful of an
existence
before this episode starts I have a
small favor to ask from you two months
ago 74 of people that watch this channel
didn't subscribe we're now down to 69 my
goal is 50 so if you've ever liked any
of the videos we've posted if you like
this channel can you do me a quick favor
and hit the Subscribe button it helps
this channel more than you know and the
bigger the channel gets as you've seen
the bigger the guests get thank you and
enjoy this episode
[Music]
Jesse
Steven
what is it that you do and why does it
matter
I teach people about
how food impacts their body
and it matters because most of us are
unknowingly
eating in a way that causes many of the
symptoms that we suffer from on a daily
basis
so it matters because once people
understand
how their dietary habits are impacting
them and once they make change
their whole universe upgrades
all of the things that they thought were
just who they were you know the poor
energy the Cravings the acne the bad
sleep the hormonal issues all of a
sudden they can vanish and so they kind
of reconnect with their true selves once
they're passed all of those symptoms why
do you care about this stuff
many different reasons
um one is a personal story
the other is because I see a lot of
people suffering from diseases that they
don't understand and that unknowingly
they're making worse my one big examples
from one big example for me is people
who have type 2 diabetes and a lot of
people who have type 2 diabetes
are eating in a way that's making it
worse but they think they're eating in a
way that's good for them and that breaks
my heart into pieces you know I want to
give people the power back I want to
give people the information back because
the landscape we live in you know the
the marketing message is about food all
the confusing packaging the confusing
advice the fads
that's really destructive and so I want
to help people like
clean all that up and the personal
reason
well I went through my own sort of
Health Journey
um that got me to a point where I
realized that health is the most
important thing in the world and if you
don't have have that you really don't
have much
and I mean we can go into some
detail into this since I guess we have
some time
and I don't usually go into detail about
this topic I've sort of learned to you
know brush over it and just give this
short version I'm not interested initial
version
um long version
so I grew up super healthy happy kid no
health issues nobody in my family had
any health issues it was very you know
easy and then I'm 19 years old and I'm
just you know becoming a teenager I'm at
the peak of this kind of phase where I
really want to be cool and I really want
to show that like I'm a badass you know
and so I'm on vacation with some friends
in Hawaii of all places and it's four of
us
my current best girlfriend and two guy
friends and we go into the jungle
just for a hike
and the two guy friends were like super
fit
guys decide to jump off this waterfall
this like 30 feet
30 waterfall
and um like Jesse should do it too and
so I was terrified and I did not want to
do it but I really wanted to be cool I
really wanted to be like
I don't care like I can do whatever yeah
I'm not scared so I decided to also jump
off the waterfall spoiler alert it was
not a good idea
so I'm at the top of the the rocks and
I'm looking down I'm like oh my God and
my two friends are down there and
they're like
they tell me to land in the water
really straight they say just
make your body like a stick and make
sure your feet touch the water first and
I as I'm in the air as soon as I leap
off the edge of the Cliff of course when
you're falling you get that sensation in
your stomach they're like and I feel
that and I just freak out like I am
terrified and so midair instead of
Landing really nice and straight I kind
of like try to stop the fall so I sort
of bend my knees a little bit but like
we're talking a really small change and
as soon as my tailbone hits the water I
feel a huge pain in my back like like a
really intense pain and so I go under
the water I come back out and I'm like
swearing I'm like
wow and my friends are like oh my God
what's happening so I managed to climb
out of the water of the pool and I'm in
so much pain but there's nothing visible
in my body there's no blood there's no
bruising my back looks normal
so I'm like I don't know what happened
I'm in so much pain they're like okay
well let's walk back to the car you know
don't know what happened so I walk back
a mile
in the jungle you know with what I ended
up learning was a broken back um which
was super dangerous
yeah through adrenaline everything was
um just pumping and allowing me to do
that 24 hours go by I don't know what's
happening I'm at home with my parents
and like I don't know I'm in so much
pain but you couldn't see anything on my
body so it was like I know so I decided
to just steep it off the next day I wake
up I'm like I know
um next day I wake up I'm still in a lot
of pain so I get taken to it like an
osteopath or I don't know a chiropractor
or something and
um he sees me arrive and he puts like a
finger on my back and I like ow he's
like no no you have to go to the
hospital so 24 hours later I get to the
hospital they finally do a scan and they
say yeah one of your vertebrae is in 13
pieces you need to not move anymore
here's a corset you're not allowed to
move until it gets fixed because if you
move if one of the pieces of your
vertebrae like dislodges a little bit
you could rupt your spinal cord and then
you're paralyzed so I was like okay
I spent two weeks at home in the house
in Hawaii we're trying to figure out
where to get surgery so I'm just in bed
I'm not allowed to move basically just
to go to the bathroom
end up being flown back to Europe on
like a medical plane to a clinic in
Zurich an amazing Place once I get there
another week of waiting until the
surgery arrives so at this point I'm
three weeks in three weeks with a broken
back terrified about what's going to
happen I haven't been able to move my
body haven't been able to move any
stress from my body I'm like really not
okay they're giving me painkillers like
the whole thing is intense you can't
move your body for what two to two weeks
or so three weeks three for the surgery
I was not allowed to move I had to stay
in bed because of the risk as we were
figuring out what to do as my parents
were like okay is she gonna get surgery
in LA and Zurich like you know you have
to figure out because then I had to stay
in the hospital after the surgery so
it's a real decision of like where are
you going to have the operation
and so I'm in the clinic in Zurich and
the doctor comes up to me he's like okay
so listen this is what's gonna happen
um
we're gonna open your body from the side
we're gonna take some organs out clean
up the vertebrae close the side flip you
over open from the back open the spine
put a metal cage in put the broken bones
back in drill six like Three Inch Nails
into your spine and then put some rods
and then we'll close you back oh by the
way there's a risk we're going to
perforate along but like hopefully you
know it won't happen I was like what the
[__] thank you yeah so anyway all this
to say that I was really really really
really really really really scared of
dying
it was [__] awful and
I was like if I just wake up if I wake
up on the other side of this I will be
filled with gratitude for like the rest
of my life you know that was the feeling
so anyway surgery happens I wake up and
instead of gratitude I start feeling a
humongous amount of pain like 100x the
amount of pain from the actual breaking
my back my entire body is on fire all of
my legs are just like inflamed like
crazy they're giving me like sleeping
pills and [__] I'm having the craziest
nightmares a nurse comes into my room
every three hours to inject you know
like opioids in my leg I mean it's just
like [__] nightmare like total total
nightmare I can't move at all because if
I move my body the scars feel like
they're gonna rip open I lose like 20
pounds in 10 days I haven't eaten
anything I don't eat anything for like
two weeks
anyway so horrible physical stuff but
the good news is the physical bit
actually heals like in three months
I'm totally fine no more pain feeling
strong exercising again no problem
but then
the real problem starts happening my
brain starts not feeling okay I start
feeling like I'm a bit like in a dream
like I have this weird sensation of like
every instead of everything being 3D
it's now 2D
and I'm kind of feel like I'm in a movie
and I look at my hands and they don't
look like mine and I start having panic
attacks when I see myself in the mirror
so like my brain starts
breaking and I had never experienced any
mental health issues when I was younger
so I I super Clueless
so anyway
um is there some time for that a medical
term for that yeah the closest thing
that I've found is depersonalization
which is losing touch with reality and
yourself and I always felt like when
those episodes happen I feel like I
leave my body like I'm kind of looking
from above and also I become super super
scared of just existence
so being alive becomes the scariest
thing
I can ever imagine and that still
happens today
very very very rarely when was the last
time it happened
actually two days ago I had like 10
minutes of it
because I had just taken the plane all
the way here to California and I felt
quite ungrounded and I could tell there
was some stress in my body that was not
moving but now when it happens like I
know how to fix it I know what's going
on but back then I had no clue so for a
year I felt like that
super clueless and I didn't understand
what in my surroundings or in how I was
living was making it better or worse I
was completely clueless I was like I
have this horrible thing happening to me
nobody understands it I feel crazy but I
also feel like
[__] this might be the rest of my life
like this might just be my life now this
immense pain and Terror at just existing
so out of all this nightmare
um emerges a very clear thought in my
head which is if you don't have your
health
you have nothing like it's Health First
like this is the number one most
important thing in life and bear in mind
I'm 19 years old which is kind of a
young age to have that realization
and Stephen I was like I need to figure
out how to fix myself like I need to
understand what's going on because
otherwise I just don't want to live
anymore it was really to that point I
was like either I figure out how to fix
this or this is just too painful of an
existence
isn't it such a shame that it requires
often a traumatic event where our health
is tested or
um we realize the
valuability of it is that the right word
yeah um for us to start thinking and
caring about it I think about this all
the time you know one of the most
pivotal shifts in my life occurred
during the pandemic where I vicariously
saw the entire world struggling
um and one of the
factors that exacerbated that struggle
or increased your chances of being
susceptible to the illness was your your
health and I watched vicariously from
this
from this lockdowned apartment in the
north of England through the TV screens
as all of these people were being rushed
to hospital Etc and it was it was the
moment that the wake-up call I needed I
didn't need something to fail in my
health I needed to watch the world
struggle because of Health for me to go
oh my God okay so
my health is my first Foundation it's
not the business it's not this it's not
my dog my cat my girlfriend whatever
because if you remove my health I lose
everything and it seems like you had
that because of a tragic incident at 19
years old where you go oh you like put
your priorities in order it's a bit like
that saying you know you have two lives
and your second life starts when you
realize you only have one interesting
yeah and that's a beautiful beautiful
saying and yes it is tragic that that
kind of stuff needs to happen I think
that life should be lived backwards
we would have such a better time we'd be
so much more grateful if we started our
life you know at 100 years old with a
body that's breaking down less energy
more difficulty and if you just got
younger you know every year you'd be so
grateful like oh my God like I'm getting
you know I don't know my biceps back or
my energy back or whatever and it's so
tragic that we just go through life
never realizing the you know the the
wealth that's just in front of us and
complaining about what's wrong and then
not realizing that in 10 years it's
going to get worse and worse but listen
yes them
the tragic incident
is often
a jumping off point for realizing how
important health is yeah
you wrote a book called The glucose
Revolution
the life-changing power of balancing
your blood sugar through that book last
year why did you write a book about
glucose of all the things in health and
food you could have written about why
glucose right it's so interesting
essentially after having this
realization that I needed to figure out
how my body worked I went on like a
quest you know with different chapters
and so first chapter was I was living in
London before I was studying mathematics
and I moved to Georgetown in the U.S
Washington DC to study biochemistry in
grad school to learn about how the body
worked and then I went to Silicon Valley
to work in genetics because I wanted to
understand her DNA you know I was trying
to like piece together as much as I
could to try to understand how my body
functioned
uh so that I could feel better so that
in the morning I could wake up not
terrified of being alive that was the
bar you know the bar was quite low and
even though DNA and studying it was
interesting it actually your DNA doesn't
give you a lot of information about what
you need to do to feel good your DNA can
tell you you know where you're from what
your traits are maybe if you have an
increased risk of a disease in the
future but your DNA doesn't tell you
exactly what you need to do
what really matters more in terms of
determining how we feel on a daily basis
and how quickly we age and if we can
just still kayak when we're 65 has much
more to do with how we live you know how
we eat how we move our environment what
we do so I learned that as I was in this
genetics company
and when I was there
something incredible happened I
discovered the world of glucose and now
I'm talking about this you know on a
daily basis and writing books about it
I discovered
that my mental health
got worse when my glucose also known as
blood sugar was not
healthy steady and balanced I discovered
that when my blood sugar levels were
kind of like a roller coaster these
episodes of depersonalization happened
much more frequently there was even this
one instance where I had and I was able
to see my blood sugar levels with a
glucose monitor that I wore for a couple
weeks
I was able to see one of the spikes in
blood sugar actually triggering the
episode I was like whoa I'm finally
understanding a clue how I'm eating and
how that affects my glucose levels is
then in turn affecting how I'm feeling
in my mental health and for me that was
like the jumping off point I was like
whoa this is
fascinating and I just Dove really deep
into it and I studied it you know for
four years I've been talking about it
for that long and ended up writing a
book about it because it's actually
really important for all of us to know
about this molecule and to learn to
manage it they call you the glucose
goddess I call myself the glucose
goddess I know they call you
yes yes exactly I wanted to find a
catchy name after you know two years
um talking about this on social media at
first my account was just my name Jesse
interest pay which is really hard to
write and pronounce and spells so I
needed a catchy name so I was like
glucose girl glucose gal and then I
thought glucose goddess you said there
that you know watching your glucose
monitor presumably on your phone it was
connected to your phone
um you could identify that the causation
between a spike in your glucose and
mental health implications but
okay
what else why else does glucose matter
yeah that's a very good question because
you know not everybody has these
depersonalization episodes so when I
first got that piece of information I
was like okay glucose is affecting how
I'm feeling let me see in the scientific
papers what else
does glucose matter for it and I went
into like a massive deep dive into all
of the scientific studies about glucose
that I could find I had like a thousand
tabs open on my computer browser I just
went really really really deep and I
discovered some amazing things so first
I discovered that I was not alone that
most people
who don't have diabetes still experience
these blood sugar spikes
potentially on a daily basis without
knowing it and that's a really good
piece of information because for years
we thought only if you have diabetes
should your glucose levels be of any
concern to you you know I was kind of
like either you have diabetes and need
to learn how to manage glucose or you
don't have diabetes and like don't even
worry about it now we know that
everybody
can be suffering from these spikes
without knowing it so that was a huge
Revelation for me and that study was
very recent I think it was from 2018. so
when I discovered you know four years
ago it had just come out so I was like
whoa like stuff is changing on this
topic we're realizing the importance of
it for everybody
second I was like okay let's look at all
the symptoms that are associated with
these spikes
from the scientific studies right so the
most common symptoms of glucose spikes
are things like cravings
for sweet Foods yeah multiple times a
day
um he looks at me as if you know that I
have that problem and you're right but
you should have just said it
no I'm just like I was just curious like
no you're looking and it's fine you've
probably heard me talk about the sweet
dream of my house that I used to have
it's gone now but
um none of us are perfect Jesse I'm not
perfect either when you say Cravings are
you is does that kind of explain why
when I have one cookie I don't have
cookies these days you know I'm a
changed man but say I were to have one
cookie why I then want another cookie
yes but sometimes I'll get into a I'm a
changed man sometimes I'll get into a
cookie week where like I want I have a
cookie on Monday and because I've had
that cookie on Monday like Tuesday I'm
showing up or Wednesday I'm showing up
for a cookie wow and then I can fall out
of like a sugar cycle where
um because I've not had sugar in a while
I don't I don't want sugar yeah so what
I'm asking there is does that Sugar
craving how long does that last question
do you know what I mean yeah absolutely
because I've wondered if it was like a
couple of days like if I've not had
sugar for three days then I don't have
the Cravings anymore or is it shorter
than that well listen from the studies
we know a few things we know that one
like if you have a cookie
so cookies contain you know sugar and
starches and sugar and starches are what
increase your glucose levels in your
blood so when you have a cookie up
glucose Spike okay
increasing concentration and then a
glucose drop after the spike this drop
has been shown to activate the craving
Center in your brain literally Telling
You Stephen find something else to eat
that sweet ASAP go back to the jewel
yeah so your brain
controls
that part
of your psyche like your brain is
telling you to go find something else
that is sweet and so when people have
cravings you know they often may feel
something like oh I feel guilty I feel
ashamed I have no willpower like I'm so
weak I'm like no no no no no no no it's
not your fault it's absolutely not your
fault the craving you're experiencing
now might have been caused usually by
breakfast by the way by the breakfast
that you had or the thing you ate a
couple hours ago and I call that sort of
starting the the sugar addiction cycle
right so let's say it's just one day you
have the cookie Spike drop you crave
something else then if you keep having
spikes for one day two day three day
phrase It's very possible that on day
four you know that particular drop for
some reason is making you want to have a
cookie most of us are on this glucose
roller coaster and have cravings
multiple times a day I knew it wasn't my
fault it's not your fault babe it's not
your fault it's not your fault and then
something else that makes that even less
your fault is that when we eat something
sweet it releases a molecule called
dopamine in our brain and dopamine is a
pleasure molecule it's the molecule that
gets released when we have sex when we
play video games when we do like illegal
drugs
humans love dopamine and so when you eat
sugar or something sweet it's a really
easy way to get a hit and dopamine is
addictive so you have those two things
happening that definitely you know when
you cut out sugar completely you realize
those Cravings go away because you no
longer have the spikes and the dopamine
addiction going on some people will hear
that and go it sounds like my body is
sabotaging me
do you see what I mean it's because
that's kind of how absolutely and that
breaks my heart
your body just wants you to stay alive
like your body is not sabotaging you
but unfortunately when we don't realize
that the way we're eating is causing
some of these symptoms we might feel
like our body is fighting us we might
feel like oh my body hates me my body's
always doing this blah blah I'm like
listen your body is speaking to you all
those symptoms you're feeling those
Cravings the acne the you know irregular
energy levels all these hormonal issues
whatever those are actually messages
coming from your body telling you Hey
Stephen there's a glucose roller coaster
happening here like help me fix it
I think your body wants you to work in
partnership with it and is trying to
alert you with all of these symptoms so
instead of like blaming our body or
feeling like uh bad body for doing this
and that if you shift it a little bit
you're like okay
let me balance my glucose levels and
learn how to do this in an easy way and
then as you balance them you see that
all these symptoms go away and you feel
like Oh I'm a friend with my body now
I'm taking care of it is taking care of
me and that was a big realization for me
in my health Journey because when I was
having those mental health issues I felt
exactly like that I was like why is this
happening like what did I do you know
and it was actually my body trying to
tell me that there was lots of things
that were going wrong one of them being
my glucose levels so anyway yes
I'm all right in thinking that my body
is not built or designed for the world
that it currently lives in and that's
part of the the battle like absolutely
absolutely because just if you look at
for example glucose levels right like
the way nature intended us to consume
glucose was in Plants right and when we
consume something sweet it was usually
in a piece of fruit
but pieces of fruit back in the day when
Nature created them they were much
smaller much less sweet they had way
more seeds and fiber in them so it
didn't create that big of a glucose
Spike but human beings because of this
desire for sweetness and pleasure have
been breeding plants and fruits to be
extra sweet extra juicy so the bananas
and the oranges you see today are not
natural at all they're the results of
Millennia breeding a little bit like how
we took gray wolves and we bred them
into Chihuahuas for fun basically
chihuahuas are not like natural animals
right they're the result of breeding we
did the same thing for a lot of pieces
of fruit and then humans were like
how can we make this go even further how
about we extract the sugar from the
fruits get rid of all that fiber and
water stuff and concentrate it into
table sugar and then how about we put
that in drinks and make like sodas or
fruit juice you know so as human beings
we've created a food landscape that is
100 causing all these glucose bikes and
My Philosophy today is not get rid of
sugar don't eat sugar anymore I'm more
like okay sugars everywhere we love it
it gives us pleasure let's learn to eat
it in a way that doesn't cause these
spikes and doesn't harm our physical and
mental health so much
we're going to get into yeah exactly how
to do that I want to get a little bit
back Upstream we were talking about the
symptoms absolutely so we you've covered
the Cravings
um what other give me some of the the
short and the long-term symptoms of
these
the glucose roller coaster and then I
want to know what glucose is because
absolutely a better place to start no no
I think symptoms is cool because most
people will recognize a lot of these in
their own lives so Cravings is the most
common one then unsteady energy levels
so feeling tired throughout the day
maybe you have chronic fatigue maybe you
need a lot of coffee to get through the
day you know maybe playing with your
kids is exhausting picking up the
groceries is exhausting just like you're
tired you know you're eating but you're
tired very common symptom and we'll get
into why that happens maybe in a bit
those are the two most common short-term
ones
then what about memory
Ah that's a good question so the more
glucose bikes you have the more the
neurons in your brain
are gonna work like less well so one of
the most common symptoms of glucose
specs on the brain is actually brain fog
so feeling like you can't really
remember stuff too well
um everything's a little bit blurry
that's basically your neurons not being
able to communicate as quickly as they
usually do and it's often felt as brain
fog but then there's a huge link between
glucose and long-term brain problems
like dementia and Alzheimer's some
people even call Alzheimer's type 3
diabetes because it's so linked to your
glucose levels so the brain if you want
your brain to be an optimal top shape
studying your glucose levels is really
key what if I want to sleep like a baby
yeah absolutely also so the more spikes
you have the less restful and deep your
sleep will be
so if you want to sleep like a baby
absolutely if you're somebody going
through menopause and you want to reduce
menopause symptoms also looking at your
glucose levels is a very important place
to start because the more spikes we have
the worse those symptoms get
talking about hormones there's also a
huge link between glucose levels and
fertility so in females today you know
there's more and more rates of
infertility there's something called
polycystic ovarian syndrome which is
more and more common that also is
extremely linked to your glucose levels
and again the first place to look if you
want to fix your hormones is balancing
your glucose
other stuff and there's a lot of
symptoms here because glucose affects
every single system in the body so
there's not a single disease or
condition that doesn't get better when
you balance your glucose levels
essentially but I'll go into a few more
um
examples skin
so
inflammation
is a direct consequence of glucose
spikes and on the on the skin
inflammation can be seen as acne eczema
psoriasis I have no idea you know
there's two words that I've just
exploded into like popular conversation
over the last I'm going to say 12 months
but you know I'm not that deep to to
know how long this conversation has been
happening but one of those words is the
word glucose I've just seen it
everywhere all of a sudden and the
second word which I've seen even in more
places is that word you just used
inflammation yeah what is inflammation
inflammation is is a stress response
from your body the ory that's supposed
to help you and clean things up so for
example when you get sick when there's a
virus or a bug that's attacking you your
body
essentially creates inflammation to
combat that enemy the problem is
inflammation now often happens against
your own body or just like chronically
at a low level and that causes many many
many issues so it's a state of stress of
the body and it happens in all of us it
can it can happen in all of the cells in
our body absolutely and today three out
of five people in the world will die of
an inflammation-based disease three out
of five three out of five the World
Health Organization calls inflammation
like one of the biggest problems of our
Century it's basically just
a way to say that your body is not
healthy there's problems going on within
because inflammation can be caused by so
many things you know by like smoking
alcohol glucose bikes stress
environmental toxins it's just like a
state of unhealth of your body if you
will and so on the skin the most common
sort of visible consequences of that
information are acne psoriasis eczema
um and then talking about skin so
the more glucose spikes you have in your
body the faster you age and that shows
on your skin as wrinkles but also on the
insides things slowly deteriorate and
break down
and there's a funny uh image for this
so from the moment you're born
your body is slowly cooking
you slowly cook let me explain like a
chicken in the oven from the moment
you're born and then when you're fully
cooked you die
your face this concept of cooking is
basically aging and it's the technical
term for it is called glycation
and the more glucose spikes you have the
faster this process happens so if you
want to age less quickly and if you know
when you look at two people who are 65
one is clearly younger than the other
like biologically right and you can
affect you can impact how quickly that
aging is going on one of the ways being
through reducing your glucose bikes okay
and then long term we talked about type
2 diabetes being the leading sort of
long-term condition linked to glucose
levels so the more glucose spikes you
have the faster you'll develop
pre-diabetes and type 2 diabetes and
then finally also mentioned that
glucose levels are linked to cancer and
heart disease so essentially to to give
you a summary
if you have a lot of glucose bikes
things are not going to go super well
you're going to have lots of symptoms
short-term medium term long term
if you currently feel
if you're like I could I could feel
better than I do
you know which most of us probably
feel
then balancing your glucose levels is a
really really freaking important place
to start it's like the the base
it's the base layer of your physical and
mental health it's really key but most
of us don't have that sorted
so to summarize yeah this short and long
term symptoms there that I've written
down here
short-term symptoms cons if you if we
aren't able to flatten our glucose
levels yeah then we Face the chance of
having constant hunger and Cravings
chronic fatigue poor sleep colds we talk
you talked a little bit about the immune
system and the implications there brain
folk you described as long-term brain
fog
um longer term effects acne aging
arthritis Alzheimer's dementia cancer
risk mental health infertility
challenges
yeah and to be clear like glucose is not
everything right there's many things
that matter in our health like emotional
connection Medical Care you know sleep
stress exercise but
learning to balance your glucose levels
is like
learning
again have fun have a fun image to use
for this it's like imagine you're
walking into an airplane
and before you go to your at your seats
you kind of peek into the cockpit and
you're like whoa lots of buttons in that
cockpit on the ceiling on the sides
there's all these leverages like oh I'm
happy I don't have to fly This Plane
you're the passenger right and you're
happy the pilots know what they're doing
in the case of our our body it's
interesting because we're both the
passenger we feel what's going on you
know we're kind of victims to what's
going on but we're also the pilots we're
in charge of our decisions we decide
what we eat what we do but often we have
no clue how to fly the plane we have no
idea how our body works so it becomes
very complicated to figure out where to
start and we have all these opinions is
marketing blah blah and it can be really
confusing and and and quite daunting so
to me learning to balance your glucose
levels is like learning about the most
important lever in the cockpit of the
plane it's like if you know about this
lever you can take off you can fly you
can land it's like the most important
thing and it will help you get to a
point where you're kind of cruising and
you're like okay I kind of have a handle
on things my symptoms are kind of
getting better so to me that's that's
the way to think about it so this begs
the question which I probably should
have started with which is what is
glucose now in my brain yeah tell me
what you think which is a slightly um
undeveloped brain on this subject matter
um I've just always thought of it as
sugar yeah so I've just thought of it as
the Sugar Ray is turned into this thing
called glucose and then the glucose runs
around in my body in my blood and seeps
into everything yeah
well that's a pretty that's a pretty
pretty good thank you
um like high level definition
um and I think that's what most people
who know a little bit about the topic
um think so let me explain so you know
exactly what it is because that
definition while it's what most people
think it's actually a bit incomplete so
I'm going to give you like
the 101 Basics so you understand what's
going on explain it like a 10 year old
absolutely so
glucose
is your body's favorite source of energy
every single cell in your body uses
glucose for energy so you know right now
both of our heart cells are using
glucose to pump your brain cells are
using glucose to think and speak my you
know hand cells are using glucose to
move Etc so every part of your body uses
glucose for energy it's really really
important
and the main way that us as human beings
we give our body this important
substance is through eating foods and
specifically through eating two
categories of foods
starchy Foods so that's like bread pasta
rice potatoes and sweet Foods
anything from your favorite cookie to a
banana to a Coca-Cola anything sweet so
starchy and sweet foods contain glucose
and when we eat them the glucose is
given to our body
so now you might think okay I want
energy right my body I want to give my
body as much energy as possible right I
want to feel good I want to have energy
so you might think okay I should eat as
much starchy and sweet Foods as possible
yeah to give my body as much energy as
possible the cookies are good for me
well this is where the whole logic thing
breaks down
it's a bit like plants so let's say I go
on vacation and I'm like Stephen can you
please take care of my houseplants
you'll be like of course Jesse Yeah my
pleasure I would love to help you so you
would go to
so you would go to my house and give my
plants a little bit of water right
because you know the plants need some
water but if you gave the plants too
much water
they would end up drowning and dying and
I would come back from my vacation all
my plants would be dead so the plant got
a bit too much of a good thing and that
caused issues the human body is the same
some glucose is good too much glucose
causes all these issues and most of us
are eating in a way that gives way too
much glucose too quickly to our body and
that's why we feel all these symptoms
so what's going on at a cellular level
when I flood my body with
glucose
so there are three sort of main
processes that I want to tell you about
on this topic so when you flood your
body with too much glucose too quickly
what happens is what I call a glucose
Spike so a glucose spike is just simply
a sort of Rapid increase in how much
glucose is in your system so it goes if
you have a glucose monitor you can kind
of see it it goes like just goes up
really fast the concentration
and so the first thing that we need to
look at is your my2 mitochondria
so your mitochondria are like little
um sort of oval organelles inside of
your cells and they kind of had a
squiggly line in the middle when we
represent them in drawings these
mitochondria are in charge of turning
glucose into energy they're super
freaking important they take the glucose
from the food and they do some magic and
outputs energy so you can do stuff like
I don't know walk run think whatever
so when a glucose Spike happens
all of that glucose heads straight to
the mitochondria because that's where it
gets processed right
and your mitochondria unfortunately
while they like a steady influx of
glucose during a spike when you give
them way too much glucose way too
quickly they kind of like shut down
they're like I just
TMI I cannot too much information like I
can't deal with this they sort of go on
strike they get stressed out and they
kind of break down so that's a real
problem because you just ate all this
food because you were like I want to
give my body energy right sugar in the
morning energy actually on the inside
your mitochondria the very things
responsible for making energy they break
down when you give them too much glucose
to handle so that's the first thing that
happens and when you mitochondria
breakdown
it increases how much stress there is in
your body and it increases that thing we
talked about inflammation which is not
good and creates a lot of like terrain
for a lot of diseases to happen so
that's the first thing that happened
glucose spikes mitochondria breakdown
and you get tired not good
second thing that happens is this thing
called glycation that I explained which
is aging the more spikes you have the
more glycation happens quickly the
faster you age on the outside with your
wrinkles but also on the inside so the
kayak when you're 65 is going to get
harder and harder the more glycation
happens when you're young for example
and then finally so your body really
wants to keep you alive as I mentioned
like your body is pretty freaking
awesome and it's really trying to
protect you and so it has a technique
that it deploys when a glucose spike is
happening to get that level of glucose
down because it knows like oof when
glucose is very high like all this bad
stuff happens so let me get that to go
down your body releases something called
insulin which comes from your pancreas
and we love insulin she's dope she grabs
all the extra glucose and she stores it
away into your muscles into your liver
and into your fat cells and that's one
of the ways that you gain fat on your
body is by having insulin take this
extra glucose and stir it away can't you
not just put it in my muscles
unfortunately
I'll call her and ask but no
unfortunately you can't decide where it
goes
um
and then while insulin is cool like long
term too much insulin is the cause of
type 2 diabetes so while she's helpful
in the short term long term she causes
all sorts of issues especially connected
to fertility which is also
um something that we might want to talk
about really fascinating topic is is
that therefore conceivable you know I've
got a friend that had um polycystic
ovaries
and
um she said on a podcast that she has
recently that she used to have a problem
with um binge eating she talked about it
and I as you said as you said that I
kind of connected the two dots that her
insulin spikes
from her binge eating challenges might
have had an impact on the polycystic
ovaries
and the infertility challenges she'd had
she'd um she had very very irregular
periods to the point at one point her
period stopped completely and I was just
wondering if there's obviously we can't
diagnose someone we don't know but I'm
just saying is there is there a link
there potentially
well listen it's hard for me to say but
um what we do know is that you know
polycystic ovarian syndrome is very
tightly linked to glucose so the more
spikes you have
I mean potentially from the eating
disorder but also just a lot of people
even without an eating disorder have
enough spikes to cause this issue the
more spikes you have the more insulin
you have in your body and then the more
insulin you have in your female body the
higher testosterone levels gets and so
PCOS positive ovarian syndrome is kind
of like a grouping of symptoms so um
cystic ovaries Mist periods balding on
the head hair growth on the face acne
Etc that we kind of put into this
package of like this is PCOS actually a
lot of these are symptoms of just excess
testosterone in a female body
testosterone being the male sex hormone
so again if you have PCOS it's very
important to balance your glucose levels
to get that testosterone down it's like
the first thing to look at the first
thing to fix and I get on a daily basis
messages from readers who had PCOS use
the hacks that I share don't have PCOS
anymore got their periods back we're
able to conceive naturally Etc so very
tightly linked glucose and hormones
this this drug insulin so it takes the
takes the glucose and it's and by the
way it's not really a drug it's like
something your body makes but then you
can also take it
um
as a drug if you have diabetes for
example so this chemical insulin it
stores it stores the glucose in my my
fat and my muscles and my liver yeah
um how does that how does it have an
impact then on weight gain and weight
loss so if I've just had a glucose Spike
insulin's been deployed yeah she's doing
her work she's storing it in all those
places does that impact my ability to
gain and lose weight absolutely so when
there's a lot of insulin around insulin
when she's around she's like okay
everybody stop we're only gonna be
putting stuff into fat cells nothing can
come out of fat cells so when when
there's High insulin levels your fat
cells become like a one-way Street
things can go in to make them grow in
size and quantity so it's one of the
ways you gain fat on your body and
nothing can come out and when people say
like I want to lose fat on my body what
they're really saying is I want to empty
my fat cells so that you know my waist
size reduces at the same time so yes the
more insulin the harder it is to
actually lose any fat
I get it
foreign
I think I get it now um is there
anything that's like missing from that
that picture you've painted for me I I
Now understand the relationship between
what I put in my mouth the impact that
has on my glucose levels it causes
spikes and dips that causes a bunch of
short and long-term consequences because
of what's going on in my mitochondria
and insulin is there is there a next
step in that process that I need to be
aware of so my insulin is now raised
right yeah she shut down my fat cells
she's doing her thing she's throwing it
away
is it the cro so The Chronic
um deployment of insulin is what I think
they call the type 2 diabetes yeah it's
called insulin resistance so when you
have a lot of insulin it's a bit like
stops working basically exactly it's
like coffee right right like first time
you drink coffee you're like whoa and
then over time the same amount of coffee
doesn't do as much to you same with
insulin so over time your body becomes
less sensitive to it it doesn't really
obey it anymore very well and that's
called insulin resistance and that then
leads to type 2 diabetes but I think you
got a pretty good overview of you know
weed food
creates glucose Spikes all of these
biochemical processes then our body
experiences these symptoms right we
experience these symptoms of glucose
spikes and I think the important thing
to remember is that these symptoms again
they're messages right they're not
something that's happening randomly just
to be annoying your body is not against
you your body is just trying to keep you
alive but as a consequence of maybe some
of the ways you're eating all these
symptoms are taking place quick word
from one of our sponsors I have to say
I've been on a bit of a journey with
this brand because when I started my
business in new territories when we
first moved social chain to the to New
York City the first place we went to was
wework we moved four of our team members
out to New York City and we built the
business from there
um I have to say there's something
magical about weworks I've spent the
last two or three weeks in LA in a wee
work and as you walk in the front door
every day it's almost like that sense of
community that sense of magic excitement
camaraderie is tangible and you don't
get that when you're working at home you
don't get that often when you're sat in
your bed on your laptop there's
something about getting out and getting
into a wee work that makes me feel a
sense of Entrepreneurship and and
creativity and building and the way that
we work to design both both in the way
that they offer subscriptions so that
you can work you know on demand but also
that the flexibility of the contracts
means that it's just the perfect place
for businesses to scale their companies
and if you haven't checked out where you
work and you want to you can go go to we
dot Co slash CEO and there you can get
50 off a trial day at wework close to
you ladies and gentlemen our newest
brand partnership will come is no
surprise to regular listeners on this
podcast the first episode of 2023 I was
joined by the incredible Professor Tim
Spector to hear more about his work at a
company called Zoe using data to
understand our bodies better so that we
can live more fulfilled higher potential
lives Zoe was born from the truth that
our overall health is impacted by our
gut health by helping you to understand
how your body is working so he can help
you to reduce your risk of long-term
disease and increase your energy levels
for me this is the future and that is
why I became an investor in the company
and that is why they are now a sponsor
of this podcast you can read up about
everything they're doing and you can
pre-order your Zoe program at
joinzoe.com and they've been kind enough
to offer an exclusive 10 off code CEO
10. so you can put that code in at
checkout ceo10
thank you so much let's get back to the
episode if this gluco roller coaster is
bad for me yeah the spikes and the
crashes how does one flatten the glucose
curve in your book you talk about these
10 hacks yeah can we go through some of
these hacks too that's for sure I think
that's the most important really because
Attack One hack one yeah eat food in the
right order yeah what did you mean by
that so
to give some context like all the hacks
in my books
they are just
summaries of scientific studies so when
I was going really deep into all the
science I found you know all these
symptoms and conditions linked to spikes
and I found also these amazing ways we
could still eat everything we loved
but without creating these spikes right
so still eating everything you love but
reducing any symptoms or any problems
you might be having physical mentally
okay so eat your food in the right order
so next time you're faced with a meal
listeners next time you're faced with a
meal
there's something amazing that you
should know if you eat
the ingredients in the meal in a
specific order you can reduce the
glucose Spike of that meal by up to 75
percent
without changing
how much you're eating what you're
eating just the order has a massive
impact on your glucose so you can still
eat the same meal with way less spikes
and way less consequences so the right
order is veggies first I should make a
t-shirt veggies first proteins and fats
second and starches and sugars last so
let's take an example of a meal Maybe
Stephen what's the typical meal you have
and then we'll add stuff for the
ingredients okay so let's say cookies
that's your sugars let's say you're
having cookies let's say I don't know
you eat fish
yeah okay let's say everything today I
just I'm so other than snails I still
got a little bit of a psychological
issue there but I've never tried snails
and I'm French really I just it just
grosses me out something you need to
figure out
okay so let's say you have like some
fish some broccoli some pasta some olive
oil and avocado and a cookie so the
right order for your glucose levels is
gonna be the broccoli first then the
fish then the pasta and the cookie and
the avocado and olive oil you can kind
of have it like with the with the fish
now this is an interesting like
theoretical
thing to understand it might not always
be very practical to just separate out
your meal and be like okay this verse
that then that then there's a few things
you should know number one you don't
actually have to wait between any of
these foods you can just eat them one
after the other and still get the
amazing impact on your glucose levels
and number two really the most important
thing here that we need to learn from
this scientific study is that the
veggies should come first so what I do
now and what you know my community does
is that we all have always have a veggie
starter at the beginning of a meal and
then we just eat the rest of the meal
kind of normally and that already has a
massive impact on your glucose levels
and how you're going to feel a lot of
people when they do any do it very much
in the opposite or in terms of like kind
of they leave the veggies on the side of
the plate you know I think when I was a
kid I'd go for whatever was tasty first
yeah when the whatever the green stuff
I've always been for the pasta first
yeah exactly and then it was like a
requirement so often parents will say
eat the [__] greens yeah as well
before you get your dessert you know
that's interesting I mean although in
restaurants obviously dessert comes last
which is probably and in restaurants
also you know bread usually comes first
and so let me explain why it's so
important to avoid having the bread
first so bread is a starch and as I
explained you know there's starches and
sugars and those are the two things that
turn into glucose when we digest them
and so when we eat something that
contains glucose on an empty stomach so
when we eat it first like a piece of
bread
the starch breaks down into glucose
molecules in your stomach and then makes
its way super quickly into your
intestine and your bloodstream because
there's nothing stopping it there's like
hey just like roller coaster so it goes
straight from your mouth to your
bloodstream so very quickly the glucose
makes its way to your bloodstream and
increases the concentration and causes a
spike now if you start your meal with
veggies instead this is what happens
veggies contain another
Superwoman and I love how all my
molecules and substances are female but
anyway she's a superwoman fiber have you
heard of fiber before you have fiber so
veggies contain fiber and fiber when we
eat it at the beginning of a meal she
does something absolutely amazing when
she arrives first in your stomach and
digestive tract
she makes its way from your stomach to
your upper intestine and there she
deploys itself like onto the walls of
your intestine like in a cruel viscous
protective mesh and just stays there
protecting you that viscous mesh that
fiber has created is then going to
reduce the spike of your meal because
all the glucose molecules arriving later
on from like the pasta for example I'm
not going to be able to make their way
as quickly and as much through your
intestine into your bloodstream because
of the fiber Shield the glucose
molecules are going to take way longer
to make their way into your bloodstream
as a result you get a smaller Spike but
you still ate the same food just with
some veggies first I know which is
amazing
so I so I when I go to a restaurant you
know you go to some restaurants they
give you bread others like the Japanese
ones give you like edamame yeah that's
much better yeah that's a that's a
veggie right so
any type of Veggie is going to be really
helpful and I try to make it uh make up
about like 30 of my meal and it can be
anything they can be raw they can be
cooked
um in my new book I have like 35 amazing
veggie starter recipes you can dress
them you can put you know some I don't
know olive oil vinegar lemon cheese
whatever onto it to make that veggie
starter feel really delicious because
it's going to protect you so much and if
you're somebody who suffers from
Cravings in the afternoon or unsteady
energy I think this hack is a really
powerful one to try out I often you know
I'm a speed eater I'm going to be honest
I'm not gonna I'm not gonna lie to you I
am I tend to eat my meal super quick and
I think the excuse I tell myself
[__] or not is that because I'm busy
I just like yeah so inhale them yeah
yeah yeah and when I'm I know because
when if I eat something say with my
girlfriend or whatever
she's she she I mean she like literally
blesses the food with her hands first
and then she like takes her time I ate
super fast too I'm like actually like
it's a competition you know like yeah
um and she's often said to me she's like
okay just slow down like just and um
one of the points that someone raised
him at some point about my like super
fast eating habit
was that it is bad for me now I'm
wondering from what you said there if
the speed in which we has an impact on
our glucose bikes as well if I ate
slower can I flatten the curve
absolutely baby yes really yeah she's
right well yes then again listen I'm a
very strong proponent of like pick your
battles right and like yes we could all
do better in so many different ways but
also you know you're a speed eater
that's fine maybe you just do it I'm
trying to live my best life okay so if
you want to slow down aging and do all
that so you can do two things you can
either just eat as quickly as you want
but at a veggie starter at the beginning
of your meal right that already is going
to have very powerful impact on your
glucose I would argue it probably will
have a stronger impact than just eating
the same meal more study because you're
not going to eat the meal over like two
hours right you might go from like three
minutes to eight minutes
it's not that big of a difference the
veggie starter will have a much bigger
impact on your glucose than just
increasing that by a few minutes
do you remember hack number three from
your book uh stop counting calories
that's a ghost writer check
I can confirm you write your book I did
I had so much fun writing the book uh
yeah about that one well so what do you
know about calories
very little yeah that's fine but tell me
and tell me like the what I what I think
they are um or just generally like it's
a it's a thing yes Thermo I'm talking
like a much simpler definition
oh sure you can if you want cheese it's
like a thermally clear reaction where a
calorie is the measure of how much heat
is required to break down a molecule of
food that's really not bad thank you wow
you really should give yourself more
credit because when before we started
you were like I know nothing about food
and biochemistry actually you know some
pretty good I know from just like doing
this podcast yeah and it's yeah this is
why I really do it because I'm very
selfish reasons and I realize that it's
helping a lot of other people that are
also idiots
um but but that's that's what I know
from guests that I've sat here so that's
my definition of a calorie fantastic so
I think a lot of people will also stay
like oh yeah calories are bad like I
need to eat not too many calories
otherwise bad stuff happens and I gain
weight or whatever so I want you to know
how calories were actually invented and
measured because
it is completely mind-boggling
so the way that scientists first started
measuring the calories in a food is the
following
okay so let's use our imagination here
the scientists they took a box okay and
they put a food in that box let's say
that cookie they put the cookie in a box
then they put this box with a cookie in
it
under I mean in another box that
contains water so they submerged the
cookie box in water okay and then
somehow they light the cookie inside the
small box on fire
they burn the cookie and they measure by
how many degrees the water the
surrounding water increases in
temperature
that is how we measured calories
literally measuring how much heat
happens when we burn that food
so as a result you might say okay well
you know
you might test a cookie in this setting
and you might test it against I don't
know an avocado and you might see that
the temperature in that big box Inc so
increases by as many degrees for both
the cookie and the avocado so you you
know from a calorie perspective you'd
say these two foods contain the same
number of calories
but that's a really reductive way of
thinking about food it's almost like
thinking these two books are both 500
pages therefore they're the same
you see how that's a problem
the number of pages in a book doesn't
tell us anything about what the book is
about who wrote it what are the words
what's the message no clue the calories
in a food also gives us no information
about what's actually in the food how is
that food going to impact how I feel my
physical health my mental health my
glucose levels
so
I want to teach people about the
molecules in the food so they actually
start recognizing like oh that food is
going to make a spike that food is not
and teaching them hacks so they can you
know improve their health and so hack
number three is called stop counting
calories because essentially what I
found is that if people just focus on
balancing their glucose levels and using
the hacks to do that
and just completely stop counting
calories their health improves
significantly
and it's a much nicer world to live in
than a world of calorie counting because
something else you should know two
people can be eating the exact same
number of calories let's say you know 2
000 calories a day but if one person is
unique in a way that causes all these
spikes
and the other one isn't the spiky 2000
calorie person is going to be full of
Cravings exhausted infamed aging faster
not sleeping as well could have mental
health issues could have PCOS yeah I
could be gaining weight like
it's not the same thing the calories are
not really what matters we need to learn
about how the food is actually affecting
us
interesting I find that so interesting
because
I was thinking as you were speaking you
answered it there at the end that a lot
of the reason why people do count
calories is for weight loss or weight
you know gain reasons
um but because of the glucose spikes in
one set of 2000 calories one meal that
will give me two thousand calories it'll
have a significant impact on the insulin
yeah levels and also on how you're
feeling and how you're doing and how
difficult you know that fat loss is or
not how much of a good time you're
having along the way
hmm so that's the Nuance that really you
know people use calorie counting as a
tool I guess but that's the Nuance
that's really missing if you really want
to achieve any of those goals for
whatever reason you have absolutely and
then you know restricting calories
of course like if you go from 2 000
calories to I don't know how many but
fewer than that you're essentially
reducing how much you're eating right so
yes it's possible that'll lead to weight
loss
but like one um that's not really
sustainable like do you really want to
count calories for the rest of your life
like that's just
I don't know that feels really difficult
to me
um and second it doesn't tell you again
like what you're eating so you're
reducing quantity so yeah that can lead
to consequences but it might not be
improving your health at all you might
be losing weight on your body but
actually you know increasing the
problems and the symptoms and the
conditions so I really hope people stop
counting calories and through this
science just kind of learn
how to approach the food landscape and
how to approach food habits in a way
that heals them from everything they
want to heal from without the sort of
calorie thing
breakfast yeah what do you have for
breakfast Stephen today yeah uh nothing
yet today I I was going so I was
actually I ordered food right
to this this wonderful Studio here in
London
um
at 10 30 a.m and it said it would take
half an hour to get here
and it got here when you arrived now I
looked at it and I thought if I eat this
then I'm gonna have some kind of like
dump halfway through this conversation
so it's just sat
can I ask what you ordered no okay
because some foods some breakfast foods
will have that impact and make you feel
tired
um so I ordered a
breakfast
wraps it's got like eggs avocados bacon
in it and it's like a gluten-free wrap
thing and I was looking at it thinking
because of this bread I think the bread
is probably going to make me have a dump
and I don't ever want to have like a
energy dump half with your comments I
don't want to fall asleep you know
that's rude there would be yeah Midway
through the conversation so I've not
eaten yet interesting coffee so actually
you know New York first is is a pretty
good one in terms of glucose so the main
thing we want to do to study our glucose
levels is have a Savory breakfast
instead of a sweet one so we want to
have a breakfast that contains protein
you know like eggs fish meat protein
powder maybe some fat like the avocado
that's fantastic and maybe some Fiber if
you want to add some veggies in there
and then any sort of like bread or
starches or potatoes should be there
just for taste it should not be the
centerpiece of the breakfast and then
importantly
for a Savory breakfast that keeps your
glucose level steady we shouldn't eat
anything sweet
at all for breakfast except whole fruit
if we want some what's the difference
between whole fruit and whatever isn't
whole fruit oh well you know as I
explained like fruit has been bred by
humans for a super long time to be extra
sweet extra juicy so today when you look
at an Apple for example it's really been
pumped full of sweetness and sugar and
made really easy to eat I had this
conversation this week with my partner
um
she was offering me some fruit and
because now I'm like a food you know
arrogant little food guy because of all
these conversations I've had I was like
babe it's got sugar in it and they've
bred it and and then she was like really
and we've had a conversation about it
and I Googled it and I said
um I Googled like the historic banana
apple yeah and the pear and I showed it
she was like what because they obviously
you know the fruit we have today is so
bright and big absolutely and easy to
eat yeah yeah exactly you peel it but
you know and then I showed her some of
these pictures of these old bananas and
they're like tiny and they're like full
of seeds and stuff full of seeds and
Tiny and actually quite tart yeah you
wouldn't really eat that menu you
wouldn't want to yeah and so even though
fruit has been bred for a super long
time to be extra sweet if you want to
eat something sweet it's still the best
thing to eat because of the fiber that
fruit contains and as they explained you
know fiber is protective in Whole Foods
in whole fruit so now here's the thing
while a piece of whole fruit is the best
to eat if you want to eat something
sweet the problem starts when we
denature that piece of whole fruits when
we blend it when we juice it when we dry
it when we puree it so many different
things so let's take for example when
you juice a piece of fruit juicing is
essentially
taking away all the fiber getting
getting rid of all the fiber the fiber
is like the the hard stuff you know the
the pulp and everything that's left over
so if you juice like an apple you're
just taking all the sugar from the Apple
putting it in water and getting rid of
all the protective fiber so all of that
super concentrated sugar that's been
bred into that piece of fruit you're not
giving to your body in a really really
fast way and as I explained the speed of
delivery is really important the faster
all that Sugar arrives the more your
mitochondria get hurt the more the
spikes are happening inflammation Etc
and so when you drink apple juice you're
essentially drinking like the amount of
sugar in two already pretty bread apples
and drinking it in a few seconds and so
your body is experiencing a massive
Spike and your body doesn't care whether
the sugar cup came from a piece of fruit
or if it came from like cane sugar and
is in a can of Coca-Cola the molecules
in the apple juice and in the can of
Coke are the same your body does not
make a difference your body's not like
oh this sugar came from fruits not going
to cause any issues oh this sugar is
from Coca-Cola oh it's going to cause
problems your body does not care and in
a can of fruit juice there's almost much
sugar as in a can of Coca-Cola
so when we eat fruit juice we have to do
it in a way that's like okay this is
dessert right this is for my pleasure
this is not for my health this is gonna
give me pleasure and make maybe make me
feel a bit happy but it's not going to
help my body which one of these bastards
told me that fruit juice was good for me
I've been drinking this stuff like I was
me too you know you're growing up if I
went and had fruit juice I was like Well
Done Steve yeah you know you've done
yourself you've done future Steve a
massive service there and then I got to
[__] 30 years old and people start
telling me that fruit juices
um
bad for me
like who who lied to me do you want to
know who lies who the people who make
fruit juice yeah I thought it would be
that yeah and same for me you know I
grew up eating drinking orange juice and
a Nutella crepe every morning come on
you knew the Nutella crepe wasn't good
for you I mean yeah but like you know I
was like I'm having orange juice so it
balances it out you know I had no idea
that it was just eating starches and
sugars just eating a massive glucose
bike for breakfast and when you create a
big glucose bike at breakfast your
entire day then becomes completely like
a glucose roller coaster the breakfast
Spike really dictates how you're going
to be doing for the rest of the day so
what is a whole fruit
a whole first is like a piece of fruit
that is just oh you think just like not
processed okay yeah like like something
you can hold in your hands that you can
buy the supermarket like an untouched
from the tree okay I thought it's not a
certain type of fruit it's just you're
talking about the state of the fruit
yeah okay what would be a better word
for whole no I guess that is the word
I'm just an idiot like um
uh uh a piece of I don't know hole is
probably the right word okay yeah okay
so I'm not gonna have any so granola I
used to think granola was
I was like again doing my health service
by eating granola
so listen
if you're having a great time no
symptoms feeling amazing top energy no
Cravings no hormonal issues no skins
Superman yeah like if you're doing fine
and you're eating things that are sweet
and you're having a great time I have
nothing to teach you but if you're
suffering in one way or another many of
the symptoms we talked about earlier
look at your breakfast and avoid the
sweet stuff so avoid the granolas and
the breakfast cereals and the oats with
banana and honey in them switch to
something Savory and I have lots of
examples of what's a Savory breakfast in
my books but
that is really going to help set your
day on a much better path and gonna help
your physical and mental health Thrive
you have these 10 hacks in your book and
um there was one in particular that I
you know there was none of them that I
thought I can do this and then there was
this other one where I was like let me
guess
which one do you think it is
um I actually I would say the vinegar
one is such a weirdo how did you why did
you I'm actually drinking vinegar before
I eat can you imagine
can you imagine me going to a restaurant
could I just get a glass of vinegar
please before I well actually it's
happening more and more Steven why are
people doing this to themselves okay
because okay by the way
I
can by the way the hacks are there for
people to pick and choose from okay
you're supposed to like compose with
them as you wish it's not you don't have
to do everything all the time you don't
have to do any of them if you don't want
to it's like information from the
science and then you decide what you do
with it hack seven drink vinegar before
you eat yeah so the scientific studies
show us that if we have one tablespoon
of vinegar in a tall glass of water so
this is a pretty this is a pretty good
size one tablespoon of vinegar in a tall
glass of water before a meal can reduce
the glucose Spike of the meal by up to
30 and the insulin Spike by up to 20
which is important because you know
insulin is also something we want to
manage and you might be wondering like
how the heck does that work well vinegar
contains another cool molecule called
acetic acid
and acetic acid does two main things
that help our glucose levels number one
you know how I explained that starches
they break down into glucose when you
digest them while acetic acid slows down
that process so it slows down how
quickly for example a piece of bread is
going to break down into individual
molecules so it slows down how quickly
the molecules of glucose arrive in your
bloodstream which is again what we want
we want to slow down the velocity and
second acetic acid goes to your muscles
and it tells your muscles to soak up
glucose as it arrives into your body so
glucose arrives more slowly in the
bloodstream and muscles soak it up as it
gets there so those two actions reduce
the spike of the meal without you
needing to change any part of that meal
so if you want to have that cookie
and you want it to have the cookie
without setting off a glucose roller
coaster without setting off that sugar
addiction having a vinegar drink before
would be a really good idea
I'll think about it
um moving on hack eight
after you eat move people say this you
know they go for walks and stuff after
like the Christmas meal or whatever
but why why is that from a scientific
perspective important it's interesting
because it's been around culturally for
a very long time right like the
post-meal walk Etc even the veggie
starter I mean in France we you know we
have this thing called kurite which is
raw veggies at the beginning of a meal
we've had it for forever you know just
culturally in Italy antipasti veggies
first Etc so it's cool to see that a lot
of these hacks have been around for a
very long time but now we understand how
they work and so we're able to be like
oh I want that back in my life so moving
after eating
so your muscles when they contract they
need energy to do so and the first place
they look for this energy is in the
glucose in your bloodstream
so we can use that to our advantage the
more muscle is Contracting the more
glucose it needs so if we use our
muscles for 10 minutes after a meal
some of the glucose from that meal will
make its way to your muscles instead of
just standing there and creating a spike
and so you can use your muscles in lots
of different ways you can go for a walk
you can clean your apartment you can
play with your dog you can go to the gym
and you can do my new favorite thing
which is let's do it together Stephen so
put your feet on the ground yeah and do
some calf raises do you know what that
is you just like go into your tippy toes
and back down calf raises and you feel
your calf Contracting yeah so this is
actually a really effective way to get
your muscles to soak up glucose because
there's a muscle in your calf called the
soleus muscle which is really extra good
at soaking up glucose so for example
after a meal you're at work
you're at your desk you want to reduce
the spike do some calf raises like this
nobody will see and you'll be helping me
because that won't come so weird they're
going to see me have this shot of
vinegar and then sit here like I'm like
I'm like there's something yeah but then
they're gonna be like damn Stephen is
doing so great look he's 65 and still
kayaking like then they might think they
should have done the same it's a good
trade-off I'm happy to take the
weirdness
um that's really interesting because
when I think about glucose spikes and
movement and stuff and what you've just
said there with my mind went straight to
being sat on a plane which I do a lot of
and they bring the food down
they bring the dessert trolley down or
whatever and then you you eat the
not me of course but someone else a
friend of mine he ate the cookie on the
dessert trolley and then he sat there
for 10 hours because he was on a plane
yeah yeah that sounds like a [__]
nightmare well for your glucose is not
great but there's lots of things you can
do so first don't have the cookie on an
empty stomach have it after some other
food for example maybe you bought like
some nuts at their airport I have some
of those nuts before the cookie That's
What I Call putting clothing on your
carbs and then you can do some calf
raises in a plane right sure vinegar you
can do the vinegar don't do it as a shot
make sure you dilutes it it's better for
your teeth okay
okay
generally do you have a
like a hypothesis or an idea or a system
for when you travel and what you eat yes
if I'm traveling I always make sure I
have a really really good Savory
breakfast even if I'm not hungry before
I leave for the plane so I have like my
favorite like two egg omelet with feta
and tomatoes it's my favorite thing to
make what is your general what is your
general walk me through your food you
know I I was watching your um some of
your interviews and the most replayed
part of one of your interviews was you
describing what you ate no way yes it
was it was an hour and a half long
interview and at the very very end of it
the interviewer asked you what you ate
on a daily basis and that was the
highest Spike oh in the in the replay
time so I thought you know for clearly
that's what people want to know at home
right now so in in a in an idyllic okay
Jessie day okay
so my favorite two egg omelets for
breakfast give me timings as well oh wow
I mean that depends I really my days
changed so much
um I don't know like on an idyllic Day
based on the science if you were being
Superwoman
get shot in the dark here
um okay wake up at
7 45
have breakfast at 8 15. two egg omelets
with feta and tomatoes
and then that makes me feel pretty good
and full into lunch at lunch I usually
will have like
a big ass salad so like maybe some
spinach quinoa everything mixed together
I put some vinegar dressing in there to
reduce the spike
um salmon avocado cheese like a nice big
like yummy thing then inevitably
inevitably in the afternoon I want to
eat something sweet because I I love
sugar like that's the thing you have to
understand like I love sweet foods and
that's one of the reasons that I figured
out all these hacks because I was like I
need to reduce my spikes because I want
my mental health to improve but I don't
want to give up my chocolate cake like
that's just not happening so anyway
enough to be in the afternoon I'm like
time for some sweet Foods so I'll do
lots of hacks around that I'll do the
vinegar hack before the chocolate cake
I'll also do another hack we haven't
spoken about yet called putting clothing
on your carbs and so that means when
you're eating starches and sugars add
some protein fat or Fiber to them so for
example I have the chocolate cake with
some Greek yogurt which is actually a
freaking delicious combo as well so I'll
do that and then I'll go for a walk or
I'll go to the gym I'll use my muscles
so I'm getting all the pleasure from the
cake with less of an impact and then in
the evening is usually when I have more
time to have like a more like longer
meal so I'll do veggie starter
some nice whatever proteins and pasta
afterwards and then usually I don't
really want anything sweet to add after
dinner because I've had the sweet thing
in the afternoon that would be my you
know Common
food habits then today for example I
woke up at 5 45 because I had this shoot
to go to in the morning before coming
here and so I just grabbed some ham from
my fridge and I have it in my bag now
and I just started munching on some ham
in the morning because again a protein
Centric breakfast is really key to
making sure you have lots of energy all
day and I wanted to come here and have a
lot of energy you know so I was like I
need to be really good about my Savory
breakfast today so I just had that
so going back then to my breakfast today
yeah
ahead of doing this podcast you know
these podcasts sometimes last you know
two hours three hours whatever it might
be
what should I be eating in your view to
stay high energy to stay focused etc etc
and what should I not be eating so you
should definitely avoid granola okay
anything sweet right you want to think
about okay protein at breakfast so
actually your breakfast wrap was pretty
good I would say because it has eggs it
has avocado it has you know some fats
some protein that's pretty pretty good
and as long as the wrap is not like a
huge amount of bread you're fine because
it's fine to have bread or starches in
the morning for taste so to me that
would feel like a really good really
good option and if you do get tired
after eating something like that maybe
you're having a bit too much food that
can also be a thing
um some of you have half and you should
feel pretty good
okay that's good to know I always wonder
and then you know a lot of people
they're sad to give up their sweet
breakfast foods and here's another hack
you can use it's you can still have that
sugar but have it as dessert after lunch
or after dinner instead of like in the
morning on an empty stomach so it's not
about cutting anything out it's about
learning to place the foods and organize
them in a way that keeps your glucose
levels steady so that you don't kick off
the Cravings roller coaster where you
feel so controlled by all the sugar and
the food around you you're very very
good at simplifying things but also
making them like both accessible and not
intimidating and that word intimidating
is one that I've I've come to learn is
quite prevalent when people are
listening to food conversations they
feel like oh my God it's a lot and it
because there's so much they don't
really take anything simple and
actionable into their lives yeah so if
you were to try and summarize the
message you're trying to spread into
maybe like a sentence or two that
someone can Embrace as a philosophy fee
for their dietary choices and their
eating habits what what exactly would
that be
I think it would be
learn the glucose hacks and then just
eat everything you love these hacks I
hope they become and this is kind of my
mission I hope they become as well known
as drink water brush your teeth that's
kind of the vibe I'm going for these are
fundamental scientific principles that
can really help you break free and Fast
Track you to feeling so so much better
and they will help you cut through all
the noise in the marketing Etc because
it's really about how your body
functions in like a biochemical level so
sorry that was more than one sentence
but that's got it and how are you
feeling now you've obviously been on a
health journey of your own but where did
you find yourself today
man I am so grateful today because
for example you know I'm on this trip
now and I'm staying in an Airbnb by
myself for 10 days like I'm yeah like
I'm alone and back in the day you know
when I was 99 I broke my back I couldn't
spend 20 minutes alone I would have a
panic attack
I am so happy of that Journey but I
really don't wish it on anyone like it
was freaking horrible but now I'm like
oh like I did it I healed I went through
this stuff I understand my body and now
I just want to make sure that I share
this information with as many people as
I possibly can
um and that's what really excites me so
I'm doing very well thank you for asking
Stephen are there any sort of
misconceptions about food or you know
glucose or Diet dietary behaviors that
we we might have missed today I want to
make sure we've really covered it off
you know yeah is there anything that you
think we might have missed so we talked
about calories which is really important
we talked about fruit well another thing
we can talk about which is a common myth
is that sugar for breakfast gives you
energy we kind of covered it in many
different ways but I want people to
understand sugar gives you pleasure it
does not give you energy it is not good
for your energy levels oh yeah that's
what's really that's a paradigm shift
for me because
I I would have thought that having
something sugary before doing like this
podcast yeah would make me like
that's not energy that's dopamine okay
and even though it feels good for a
little while then you crash and then you
want more it's actually not unlocking
like deep biological energy and stamina
it's just making you and by the way
sometimes you want that like if you're
writing something and you're just like I
need some just to eat that cooking you
know sometimes we need to use it to our
advantage that dopamine hits but long
term it's not what's going to be helpful
for you and if you did that thing every
time you recorded a podcast after a few
months you feel really chronically tired
and you'll be like okay this is not
working anymore because your
mitochondria would have suffered so much
on the inside
I have this box in front of me on the
front of it it says the Diary of a SEO
conversation cards I'm so excited on the
back it says vulnerability is the
daughter connection this is a new
tradition we've taken all of the
questions that were ever written in the
Diary of a CEO and would turn them into
these cards and on the front of the card
you can see a question like this written
by the person and then it says the name
of the person that wrote it and on the
back you can see the person that
answered it if you scan this QR code
these are available at thediary.com I
need to get this this is very cool we
the the reason why we've done this is
because
you know I've come to notice and learn
that there's a certain type of question
you can ask somebody and if you have the
you know the patience to let them speak
um that unlocks a level of vulnerability
which is connective for humans so that's
why it says vulnerability is the door to
connection because after I do these
podcast conversations with people
especially when we're talking about like
real life story-centric stuff I just
feel so connected to them like we become
like best friends in two hours and then
we have an ongoing relationship and I
have that with nearly all of the guests
that have been on this podcast that have
really opened up with me so we want
people to be able to do that at home I
have four cards here that I've picked
from the the deck I think there's about
60 or 70 cards in the in the full deck
which is available online
um and I pick four here so I'm going to
slide these over to you so excited why
why are you so excited well my
question's not exciting no but they were
but like I love this kind of stuff I
love the vulnerable questions I love I
just I love this okay for that reason
I'm gonna ask you to pick two okay if
you regret that decision no I won't okay
I'm gonna slide them over
okay so I look at them all no no no no
no oh oh okay I don't choose no no okay
I'm gonna pick the two middle ones okay
and I read them please read them and say
who uh wrote The question as well
what is one thing you regret not saying
to somebody and why didn't you say it
he wrote that question
Nick Jones
he's the founder of her house yeah
this is an interesting one that's coming
to me and I still have time to say it so
that's good I wish I had spent more time
talking to the surgeon that operated on
me
and I wish I had thanked him for first
of all like how great of a job he did on
me but also just
how much love and care he put into my
scars
they're really thin and beautiful and
they were sewn like from the inside and
in the side scar that's gonna make me
cry
it was really sweet because it's a side
scarf
he put it just in like the crease of my
waist
you know
touched that and he did
and so I guess I could write him a
letter but
um and that's something that I have
every day in my body you know and just
it was really cool he did that
so I'm gonna write him a letter this
doesn't make me want to do it because
he's still around and alive so
I love it so yeah not too late
okay second question
tell me something you have never told
anyone before Oh my God
I'm such an open book it's tough
um
something I've never told anyone before
interesting
let me think of this one
Gary Neville asked this question is that
how you say his name yeah
well yesterday I spoke to my dad on the
phone and
you seemed sad
hmm and I mean that made me sad
and I just want him to be happy
that's all I can think of
you sounded sad yeah
yeah he doesn't talk a lot about his
feelings and I could just tell that he
was sad
how could you tell
um
I think it's in the tone of The Voice
you know and he was in Paris and he
thought I was there too and so he wanted
to see me and I was like oh I'm not in
Paris right now
and I could just tell that
he would have really liked to see me
and so that made me sad that I was you
know not there
you have a suspicion why he's sad don't
you like a deeper suspicion
yeah I think life is a little bit rough
on him right now and um
I think a combination of lots of stuff
I'm not sure like nothing acute more
like a chronic like
kind of uh
kind of feeling
and um I just wish I could like wave a
magic wand and make sure everybody I
love is happy all the time but
a lot of people struggle with that
especially with their parents you almost
see like a decaying in their
energy and joy for life and it's slow
yeah and it's like almost quite chronic
isn't it like a lot of the subject
matter we've talked about today like
inflammation it's almost like a
psychological inflammation
that when you you know they get to a
certain
stage sometimes it happens earlier but
you almost see a you know people
characterize it as being like grumpy old
you know oh yes or like sad old whatever
I wonder what that is I wonder what's
what the like psychological nutrient
that's missing is it connection is it a
sense of purpose is it I mean it has to
be said it's not everybody but there is
um I'm not sure I think it's also like a
the unexamined aspect of life you know I
feel like
if you've gone to therapy and you've
done work you kind of have tools to like
you know change the things you want to
change in your life and put boundaries
and like do things and
I think a lot of people
um don't have really those tools yet and
but in the same way that they don't have
the tools around food and how to just
make themselves feel better
um I think it's um
to me it feels like a tool thing I don't
know maybe it's just because you know
that's my own experience of things but
I think those tools are most absent in
men yeah typically you know those tools
about expression and opening up and
vulnerability and it's much of the
reason why I love doing this so much
yeah because we get to have these kinds
of conversations and they are medicinal
in many many ways you know and these
cars are really wonderful because I feel
like even if you're somebody who doesn't
tend to open up very much like the fact
that the card is asking the question
makes it totally it was random as well
you picked it it wasn't me so yeah but
just generally like I think everybody
should play this it's so important
because it's really hard to ask these
questions and it's really hard for
people to take them seriously and be
like I'm actually going to answer this
but the card medium and especially it's
so beautiful the handwriting I love it
it's really lovely idea
uh it was quite interesting I was just
thinking when you said that the reason
why
it's different from me just asking you
those questions versus you selecting one
and it being on this sort of Middle
Ground enamel object is because it
removes the agenda yeah from the
question exactly you know what I mean it
doesn't come with an agenda yeah
so it's almost like you asked yourself
it right we do have another the old
tradition which was asking you the
question yes in the book
do it do it
I'm ready
okay
this is a tough one oh yeah
um
[Music]
do it Stephen you have my permission
okay
the person you cherish most in life
dies tomorrow
you have a 60-second phone call with
them
what do you tell them
well the good news is I communicate a
lot I would say my mom to be honest just
you know
thank you guys
happily I would say listen
it was amazing thank you I feel like I
told you everything and you know how I
feel about you
and um
it's really sad but it would be sad if
it weren't sad
thank you Jesse thank you amazing
conversation you're an amazing person
and the work you're doing is so
incredibly necessary because it's
turning the lights on to something that
is
um driving us very much from the back
room in terms of our health outcomes
that most of us don't know anything
about I've been trying to be healthy
I've had I've had the intention but
because of the lack of information
um I've been failing without knowing it
yeah and it's the motivation thing as
well it's like how do you make it easy
enough that you can actually start today
amen thank you so much Jesse everybody
can go find your work everyone will be
able to find you on the internet um they
call you the glucose goddess you very
much are goddess and your book um about
the glucose Revolution is a must must
read for anybody that's listening to
this so I hope everybody goes and gets
that book because I'll be honest I'm
gonna be completely honest with you here
it's important I thought the subject
matter if glucose was [__] boring
until
I read your book nice and then I was
like oh my God yeah you know and I think
I think a lot people who are in the camp
I was in will probably feel the same way
so take my word for it it's an
incredible book and it's a must read
book Thank You Stephen and I have a new
book because goddess method that just
came out and where what is the I've not
read that one what's the distinction
between the two so glucose Revolution is
like the everything all the science the
stories the backstory the glucose
goddess method is a four-week guide to
actually get started oh like the
actionable yeah it's like okay week one
breakfast here are all the recipes you
can use week two vinegar here's what you
do week three veggie starters so it's an
even it's yet another layer of help to
actually help you start today incredible
that's what I need to read next yeah
that's what I'll do thank you so much
Jesse's oh no no thank you Stephen
over the last couple of how long maybe
four months I've been changing my diet
shall I say many of you have really been
paying attention to this podcast will
know why I've sat here with some
incredible Health experts and one of the
things that's really come through for me
which has caused a big change in my life
is the need for us to have these
superfoods these green Foods these
vegetables and then a company I love so
much and a company I'm an investor in
and then a company that sponsored this
podcast and I'm on the board of recently
announced a new product which absolutely
spoke to exactly where I was in my life
and that is huel and they announced
Daily Greens Daily Greens is a product
that contains 91 superfoods nutrients
and plant-based ingredients which helps
me meet that dietary requirement with
the convenience that hewell always
offers unfortunately it's only currently
available in the US but I hope
I pray that it'll be with you guys in
the UK too so if you're in the US check
it out it's an incredible product I've
been having it here in La for the last
couple of weeks and it's a game changer
foreign
[Music]